# Department of Biological Sciences < Carnegie Mellon University

Gordon Rule, Interim Department Head

Amanda Willard, Director of Undergraduate Studies

Location: Doherty Hall 1321

[www.cmu.edu/bio](http://www.cmu.edu/bio)

A major revolution is occurring in the field of biological sciences. Biology is undergoing unprecedented technological advances in biochemistry, biophysics, cell biology, genetics, molecular biology, developmental biology, neuroscience and computational biology. Carnegie Mellon's Department of Biological Sciences is nationally recognized as one of the outstanding departments in these areas. Advances in basic research are already being used to solve problems, not only in medicine and public health, but also in areas such as agriculture, forestry, mining, energy, and in industrial and pharmaceutical manufacturing processes. The department provides its students with an education that has both intellectual breadth and depth of exposure to modern research biology. This education can be used to gain employment immediately after graduation in government, industry or academic research laboratories, or to pursue graduate studies in a variety of areas such as science, medicine, public health, law, or business. A degree in biological sciences provides excellent preparation for medical school or other graduate programs in the health professions. These students are aided by the Carnegie Mellon Health Professions Program (HPP), an advisory and resource service for all Carnegie Mellon students who are considering careers in the health care field. (See the [HPP](http://coursecatalog.web.cmu.edu/aboutcmu/undergraduateoptions/#healthprofessionsprogram) section in this catalog or [www.cmu.edu/hpp](http://www.cmu.edu/hpp) for more information.)

The department offers a Bachelor of Science (B.S.) degree in Biological Sciences. This program has a distinctive core curriculum that provides a foundation in biology, chemistry, computer science, mathematics, and physics. In addition to the core courses, the program includes six biology electives, free electives as well as humanities, social science and fine arts electives. With these electives, students can shape a degree program according to their own interests and career goals. For students who have an interest in a particular field of biology and wish to have a specialized focus, the department offers options in biochemistry, biophysics, cell biology, computational biology, developmental biology, genetics, molecular biology and neuroscience that provide the relevant training in each area. The options are especially recommended for students who are considering graduate school in one of these areas.

In this exciting era that includes the influence of biology and the life sciences on many fields from medicine to law, the in-depth exposure to multiple disciplines provides opportunities for students to prepare for involvement at the forefront of emerging new fields, markets, and policy changes. The Department of Biological Sciences at Carnegie Mellon is working at these new interfaces through interdisciplinary research and educational programs. Innovative interdisciplinary degrees which are offered by the department include the inter-college B.S. degree in Neuroscience as well as the unified B.S. degree in Biological Sciences and Psychology. Students also pursue interests at the interface between the arts and sciences through the Bachelor of Science and Arts (B.S.A.) degree program combining biological sciences or neurobiology with a discipline in the College of Fine Arts.  A stand-alone Bachelor of Arts (B.A.) degree is available for students who wish to expand their educational training into other fields.  Many students choose to broaden their education by pursuing minors and additional majors in disciplines throughout the university, not just within the Mellon College of Science.

One of the most important features of the Department of Biological Sciences is the opportunity for undergraduate students to interact with faculty. Providing a solid foundation to scientific practice is critical; therefore, the department offers first-year students a variety of inquiry-based, hands-on courses that incorporate a wide range of topics and interests within Biological Sciences. These courses kick-start the transformation of science students to scientists. We encourage our students to get to know their faculty through one of these courses, or through mentored, independent research projects in the faculty laboratories.  Our faculty members are prominent research scientists who also teach beginning and advanced courses. The upper level teaching laboratories are located in the same building as the faculty research laboratories and share scientific equipment. We encourage students to make themselves aware of the research areas of the faculty and to develop research projects with faculty. While such research is usually most important in the senior year, it may begin earlier in a student's undergraduate training. The department has an Honors Program in Research Biology to facilitate a more intensive involvement in research for eligible students. During the past four years, more than 85 percent of the undergraduate biology majors have worked with faculty on their research and, in some cases, have been co-authors of research papers and have given presentations at national meetings.

Since the fall of 2011, the Department of Biological Sciences has offered a B.S. degree in Biological Sciences at Carnegie Mellon University in Doha, Qatar.  Students enrolled in this degree program will also complete the requirements outlined below.  One of the required courses for the CMU-Qatar program is offered through a collaboration with the Weill Cornell Medical College in Qatar. For a listing of how the degree requirements are fulfilled for students enrolled in Doha, please consult the CMU-Qatar website ([www.qatar.cmu.edu/curriculum-bs](https://www.qatar.cmu.edu/curriculum-bs)). 

### Program Outcomes

Upon graduation recipients of the B.S. or B.A. degree in Biological Sciences will:

-   Use the basic concepts and experimental, computational, and theoretical methods of the core fields of science, mathematics and technology.
-   Use foundational knowledge from the natural sciences and mathematics for advanced work in the discipline.
-   Understand and apply the scientific method.
-   Apply disciplinary knowledge toward solving problems.
-   Use modern methods for finding and sharing current scientific information and primary literature.
-   Convey information including scientific content in written and oral formats within Biological Sciences.
-   Work in multidisciplinary and culturally diverse teams.
-   Demonstrate proper values and ethics within Biological Sciences, the University, and the larger scientific community.